Add EIP: Ethereum state using a unified binary tree (#9257)
ethereum/EIPs: EIPS/eip-XXX.md

---

> eip: TODO

Reviewer: ```suggestion
eip: 7864
```

---
eip: TODO
title: Ethereum state using a unified binary tree

> author: Vitalik Buterin (@vbuterin), Guillaume Ballet (@gballet), Dankrad Feist (@dankrad), Ignacio Hagopian (@jsign), Kevaundray Wedderburn (@kevaundray), Tanishq Jasoria (@tanishqjasoria), Gajinder Singh (@g11tech), Danno Ferrin (@shemnon), Piper Merriam (@pipermerriam), Gottfried Herold (@GottfriedHerold)

Author: This EIP pulls many ideas from EIP-6800, so I'd still honor the work of those authors in this EIP.

If anyone wants their name to be removed, please LMK!

> discussions-to: TODO

Author: I'll create it after the EIP has a assigned number.

status: Draft
type: Standards Track
category: Core
created: 2025-01-20

---

## Abstract

Introduce a new binary state tree, intended to replace the hexary patricia trees. Account and storage tries are merged into a single tree with 32-byte keys, which also contains contracts code. Account data is broken into independent leaves which  are grouped by 256 in order to provide some locality.

> (Draft note: the hash function used in the current draft is not final, other potential candidates are Keccak or Poseidon2. For the latter, an extra section on how to encode 32-bytes->[FiniteField] will be created. **Do not** assume Blake3 is a final decision.)

Author: This is the only "draft" note in the EIP that will eventually be removed.
I wanted to signal that the hash function might change in further drafts so potential PoC have that in mind.

## Motivation

Ethereum's long-term goal is to allow blocks to be proved with validity proof so that chain verification is as simple and fast as possible. One of the most challenging parts of achieving that goal is proving the state of the tree, which is required for EVM execution.

The current MPT design isn’t friendly for validity proofs for many reasons, such as using RLP for node encoding, Keccak as a hashing function, being a “tree of trees”, and not including accounts code as part of the state.

> Apart from requiring a state tree design that is friendly for block validity proofs, it’s also important to have fast and small regular Merkle proofs when the amount of state to prove is small. This is useful not only for Ethereum users but also for supporting future protocol needs in a stateless world.

Author: I'm not sure about the `wallets` suggestion, since that's focusing on a particular kind of applications. Small non-snark proofs can be useful for any user or app in general (wallets included). LMK your thoughts.

Reg "future protocol needs", yep, I'll add some examples to be more concrete.

> Apart from requiring a state tree design that is friendly for block validity proofs, it’s also important to have fast and small regular Merkle proofs when the amount of state to prove is small. This is useful not only for Ethereum users but also for supporting future protocol needs in a stateless world.

Reviewer 2: Makes sense, 'Ethereum users' just seemed a bit vague to me. Maybe 'the application layer'?

> Apart from requiring a state tree design that is friendly for block validity proofs, it’s also important to have fast and small regular Merkle proofs when the amount of state to prove is small. This is useful not only for Ethereum users but also for supporting future protocol needs in a stateless world.

Author: SGTM!

## Specification

The keywords “MUST”, “MUST NOT”, “REQUIRED”, “SHALL”, “SHALL NOT”, “SHOULD”, “SHOULD NOT”, “RECOMMENDED”, “NOT RECOMMENDED”, “MAY”, and “OPTIONAL” in this document are to be interpreted as described in RFC 2119 and RFC 8174.

### Notable changes from the hexary structure

- The account and storage tries are merged into a single tree.
- RLP is no longer used.
- The account’s code is chunked and included in the tree.
- Account data (e.g., balance, nonce, first storage slots, first code-chunks) is co-located in the tree to reduce branch openings.

### Tree structure

The proposed Binary Tree stores key-value entries where both the key and value are 32 bytes. The first 31-bytes of the key define the entry stem, and the last byte is the subindex in that stem. If two keys have the same stem, they live in the same “big branch” — this co-locates groups of 256 keys (i.e: keys with the same first 31-bytes).

> ![Image](https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/8137de4f-7cf2-4d6e-a4b3-d66f2c549dac)

Author: Looking at the assets directory, looks like png is preferred, so I'll stick with that.

The proposed design should consider the usual complexity, performance, and efficiency for out-of-circuit implementations (i.e. EL clients) and in-circuit ones for generating proofs in SNARKs.

The tree design structure tries to be simple, by not having complex branching rules. For example, in contrast with the MPT, we avoid extension nodes injected in the middle of branches. Also, RLP encoding was removed since it adds unnecessary complexity. Although complexity can be managed more easily in out-of-circuit implementations, it's valuable to help circuit implementations be as simple as possible to avoid proving overhead.

The most important factor in the design is the cryptographic hash function used for merkelization. This hash function should have efficient implementations both out and in circuits. The proposed BLAKE3 hash function was chosen since it provides a good balance between:

- Out-of-circuit performance (i.e. for raw EL client execution)
- In circuit performance (i.e. for proving in a validity proof)
- Proven security

Poseidon2 was considered to perform well in the first two points, but further research is still needed to ensure its security.

> Due to recent progress in the quantum computing field, expert estimations consider that they can become real in the 2030s. Other alternatives, such as Verkle Trees, introduce a new cryptography stack to the protocol, which relies on elliptic curves that aren't post-quantum secure. This makes the current tree proposal attractive since it only depends on hash functions, which are still safe in this new paradigm.

Reviewer 2: Could mention here ECC being deprecated by NIST in 2030 to be more concrete

Moreover, there has been impressive progress in proving systems, which indicates that we could be close to achieving the required performance for creating pre-state & post-state proofs fast enough. This last point is crucial since the main advantage of Verkle Trees was having proofs that are small and fast to generate.

> Finally, the current state tree proposal will probably be the final state tree used in the protocol, compared with Verkle Trees, which should eventually be replaced again with a post-quantum secure version.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Finally, the current state tree proposal will probably be the final state tree used in the protocol, compared with Verkle Trees, which would eventually need to be replaced by a post-quantum secure alternative.
```

For any `N`, the expression is minimized at `k = 2`. Here’s a table of branch lengths for different `k` values assuming `N = 2**24`:

| `k` (children per node) | Branch length (chunks) | Branch length (bytes) |
| ----------------------- | ---------------------- | --------------------- |
| 2                       | 1 * 24 = 24            | 768                   |
| 4                       | 3 * 12 = 36            | 1152                  |
| 8                       | 7 * 8 = 56             | 1792                  |
| 16                      | 15 * 6 = 90            | 2880                  |

Actual branch lengths might be slightly larger than this due to uneven distribution, but the pattern of `k=2` remains by far the best.

### Tree depth

> The tree design attempts to be as simple as possible considering both out-of-circuit and circuit implementations, while satisfying our proving hashes throughput constraints.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The tree design attempts to be as simple as possible considering both out-of-circuit and circuit implementations, while satisfying our throughput constraints on proving hashes.
```

> The proposed design avoids a full 248-bit depth as it would happen in a SMT. Since we don't use arithmetic hashes (e.g: Poseidon2), this is required to be agressive in avoiding hashing load in proving systems which today is quite tight on throughput in commodity hardware. There're some tricks that could be used to mitigate this, but this also adds extra complexity to the spec.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The proposed design avoids a full 248-bit depth as it would happen in a sparse Merkle tree (SMT). Since we don't use arithmetic hashes (e.g. Poseidon2), this is required to be aggressive in avoiding hashing load in proving systems which today is quite tight on throughput in commodity hardware. There are some tricks that could be used to mitigate this, but this also adds extra complexity.
```

> Moreover, we could push this further trying to introduce extension nodes in middle of paths as done in MPT, but this also adds complexity that might not worth it considering the tree should be quite balanced.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Moreover, we could push this further trying to introduce extension nodes in middle of paths as done in a MPT, but this also adds complexity that might not worth it considering the tree should be quite balanced.
```

### State-expiry

State-expiry strategies such as [EIP-7736](https://eips.ethereum.org/EIPS/eip-7736) could still be applied, requiring a change in the design. One potential solution is adding a field the `StemNode` with `epoch` as described in the mentioned EIP. Another alternative is to use 247-bits for the stem, and have two subtrees `StemValuesNode`, which would correspond to the current 256-values, and `StemMetaNode` which is also a 256-subtree that can be used to store arbitrary stem metadata.

> ## **Backwards Compatibility**

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
## Backwards Compatibility
```
Same for following headings

> The main backward-compatibility-breaking changes are:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The main breaking changes are:
```

- (1) Gas costs for code chunk access can have an impact on applications’ economic viability
- (2) Tree structure change makes in-EVM proofs of historical state no longer work

> (1) can be mitigated by increasing the gas limit while implementing this EIP, reducing the risk that applications will no longer work due to transaction gas usage rising above the block gas limit.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
(1) can be mitigated by increasing the gas limit while implementing this EIP, reducing the risk that applications will have excessive gas costs.
```
The wording here is a bit confusing to me, why would a tx gas usage exceed the block gas limit?

Author: I changed the sentence hopefully to be more clear.

The point is that under the new scheme, we merkelize the accounts code. When a contract is executed, we now charge for code access not only account basic data and storage slot access.

This means that under the exact same contract execution scenario (same code and same world state), the TX will consume more gas since it also has to pay for accessing code chunks. This indirectly means it will use more gas compared to todays version of the protocol.

Last year, [I did some research](https://hackmd.io/@jsign/verkle-code-mainnet-chunking-analysis) about this aspect if you're interested.

## **Test Cases**

TODO

## **Reference Implementation**

> A Python reference implementation can be found in `github.com/jsign/binary-tree-spec`.

Reviewer 2: Add a link here
